A telecommunications company carries out telephone campaigns to propose offers to its customers, and is interested in managing the data of these telephone calls. For each phone call, a schema is prepared, which specifies the employee who will call, the recipient customer, the approximate time and day for the first attempt and the offers that will be presented. For each plot that is assigned to them, the employees make one or more phone calls, until they are able to actually speak with the customer and to conclude, in some way, the presentation of the plot. For each telephone call made, it is important to memorize the date, time, duration, outcome (intermediate or final), the schema to which it refers, and the offers that were actually presented during the telephone call, given that it is generally not possible to present all the offers that had been specified in the schema. Furthermore, for each offer presented in a specific telephone call, it is interesting to memorize the degree of interest (on a scale from -5 to +5) demostrated by the customer for that offer. Finally, if during the phone call the employee managed to make an appointment with the customer, she/he is also interested in memorizing the data relating to the appointment, and in particular the phone call during which it was set, the time and place of the appointment, and any annotations. For each customer, in addition to all the appointments that concern them, also name, surname, address and the offers that they have signed in the past are of interest. For a specific set of “profiled customers”, we also record the profession, the estimated income, the family condition. For each offer, a textual description and a validity interval are of interest. For each employee, their name, surname, address and job title are of interest.