# Association Rules
## Market Basket Analysis (MBA)
Given a set of transactions where is transaction is a set of items.
The goal is to find groups of items frequently bought together.
It is an actionable insight. The seller can sell items in a single package. 

## Association Rules Introduction
Express how product/services relate to each other and tend to group together.
"If a customer purchases diapers then will also purchase beer"
Rule form: “Body → Ηead \[support, confidence]”.
buys(x, “diapers”) → buys(x, “beers”) \[0.5%, 60%]

Body/Head/Antecedent $X\rightarrow Y$ Head/Tail/Consequent

Rules can be
1. useful
2. trivial
3. unexplicable

chatgpt
> Association rule mining, a specific type of pattern mining, involves finding rules that describe how the presence of certain items in a dataset implies the presence of other items. It specifically aims to find relationships between variables in the form of "if-then" rules, typically using measures like support and confidence to evaluate these rules.

# Apriori
## Definitions



## Association Rule Mining





Methods to compute Association Rules.
1. Basic Apriori Algorithm
2. Optimizations of Apriori
3. Multi-Dimension AR
4. Quantititative AR

## Structure of Apriori Algorithm
Association Rule Mining follows a 2-step approach.
1. **Frequent Itemset Generation**
	1. generate all itemsets whose $support\geq minsup$
2. **Rule Generation**
	1. generate high confidence rules from each frequent itemset
	2. each rule is a binary partitioning of a frequent itemset

Note that frequent itemset generation is computationally expensive.
Given d items, there are $2^d$ possible candidate itemsets.

Steps in other words:
1. iteratively find frequent itemsets (Frequent Itemset Generation)
	1. that satisfy the support constraint
	2. with cardinality from 1 to k (k-itemset)
	3. remember that a subset of a frequent itemset is also a frequent itemset
2. use the frequent itemsets to generate association rules (Rule Generation)

## 1. Frequent Itemset Generation
Approaches
1. brute-force
2. reducing number of candidates
3. reducing number of transactions
4. reducing number of comparisons







## 2. Rule Generation





## Pattern Evaluation




## Multi-level Association Rules




# FP-Growth
It is about mining frequent patterns without candidate generation.


