## Relational Algebra
Operators to transform relations into relations.
Why an algebra is nice?
- the operators are closed
- in which order you should do things
In every DBMS, the compiler translates relational calculus into algebraic operations that can be executed.
For example, it is quite amazing that $\forall$ can be translated into algebraic operations.

A relation (also called table) is a set of tuples (rows) and attributes (columns).
The two fondamental operations are
1. projection $\pi$
2. restriction $\sigma$

Projection.
Takes a table, returns a table. It change the heigh but not the width.
$$\pi_{A,B}(R)$$
In set theory, you cannot have duplicates, hence, projecting name and age for example, can be compressed into one.
It is called duplicates elimination.

In multi-set theory, multi-sets are produced instead of eliminated.
$$\pi_{A,B}^b(R)$$

Restriction.
It is to select some lines.
It is propositional boolean logic, meaning `and, or, not`. Not quantifiers.
$$\sigma_{condition}(R)$$
Union and difference.
To take the union of two tables $R\cup S$, they must have the same schema.
The difference $R-S$ is the elements of R that are not in S.

Cartesian product is the set of all pairs, every element of the first table and every element of the second table.
It may be necessary to use $rename_{r\rightarrow b}(R)$.
The operator `as` put something before the name of each attribute.
For example `visits as v` will rename fields like `v.date`.

The cartesian product produces very big and useless tables.
In fact, it is used in combination with restrictions.
If I have a table `visits as V` with 100 rows and `doctors as D`, the cartesian product will create a table with 2000 rows.
If we add the restriction $\sigma{v.doc_{id}=d.doc_{id}}$.

## Example
(in new slides)
The symbol for join is $\bowtie$

How to find pair of people from the same family?
$Person P1 \bowtie_{P1.Fid=P2.Fid} Person P2$
$\pi_{P1.name, P2.name}$
$\sigma_{P1.Pid\neq P2-Pid}$

Better to use
Person P1 $\bowtie_{P1.Fid=P2.Fid}$ Person P2
$\pi_{P1.name, P2.name\ AND\ P1.Pid\neq P2<Pid}$

NOW..

$Persons P \bowtie_{P.id=T.id} TaxPayers T$
$\pi_$

Find people who are not taxpayers?

> Add queries in KINDLE

## Group by

When I want to measure the avg of marks for each student.
Two elements are in the same group if they belong to the same student.
*Important distinction*
The dimension is a grouping criteria.
The measure is an aggregation condition.
Grouping means creating a set from two lines.
Aggregate means destroying a set into one measure (the avg).
There are two steps then.

This is extremely important for data analysis.
Grouping is defined by dimensions and measures.

> group by kindle


## Natural Join
Means that I take a join between R and S with an inequality condition.
??


