SQL is not just a query language, but is also language for the definition of databases (Datadefinition language (DDL)) 
1. CREATE SCHEMA
2. CREATE TABLE
3. CREATE VIEW
4. CREATE INDEX, a data structure to access faster the table
5. CREATE PROCEDURE
6. CREATE TRIGGER, code automatically executed whenever a condition is met
7. GRANT.


## Create Table

```sql
CREATE TABLE Employees (
	Code CHAR(8) NOT NULL, --null allowed by default
	Name CHAR(20),
	Birthyear INTEGER CHECK (Birthyear < 2005),
	Qualification CHAR(20) DEFAULT ‘Employee’,
	Supervisor CHAR(8),
	PRIMARY KEY pk_ Employees (Code),
	FOREIGN KEY fk_ Employees (Supervisor)
	REFERENCES Employees ) 
	
CREATE TABLE Dependents (  
	Name CHAR(20), 
	Birthyear INTEGER, 
	EmployeeCode CHAR(8), 
	FOREIGN KEY fk_ Dependents (EmployeeCode) 
		REFERENCES Employees 
		ON DELETE SET NULL)
```

Why CHECK ?
Whenever a constraint is violated, a failure is raised.  
If a transaction is aborted, it eliminates all the effects of this transaction
The check is centralized in the schema.  And not checked after using a script.  
However, usually there is an additional gui check preventing the user from even trying adding wrong data.

a primary key is mandatory only if there is a foreign key for which the pk is the target

What you create with a CREATE can be deleted with the DROP command or modified with the ALTER command.

You can choose ON DELETE
1. NO ACTION, meaning transaction failed
2. CASCADE
3. SET NULL

## Views
MATERIALIZED VIEW: create a table as a result of a query .
BUT note if the main table changes, you need to run again the query (also using a trigger)

the view is much better than the materialized view,  
in rare cases with many calls on the same virtual table, it might make sense to materialize it while making the specific queries,

```sql
CREATE VIEW Supervisors 
	AS  SELECT Code, Name, Qualification, Salary 
		FROM Employees 
		WHERE Supervisor IS NULL
```


## CREATE PROCEDURE/FUNCTION

you can store code in the dbms written in other languages and execute it directly from there.

For example a trigger
```sql
CREATE TRIGGER SalaryCheck 
	BEFORE INSERT ON Employees 
	DECLARE 
		AvgSalary FLOAT 
	BEGIN 
		SELECT avg(Salary) INTO AvgSalary 
		FROM Employees 
		WHERE Department = :new.Department; 
		IF :new.Salary > 2 * AvgSalary 
		THEN RAISE_APPL._ERR.(-2061, ‘Salary too high’) 
		END IF; 
	END;
```

Essential properties of triggers: Termination.
Be aware of INFINTE LOOP if a trigger calls another trigger that recall the first.  
The loop may remain in the db for days, making the system slower.

## Access Control

Access Control 
• Who creates the BD scheme is the only one who can do CREATE, ALTER and DROP 
• Who creates a Table determines the ways in which others can use it: 
• GRANT Privileges ON Object TO Users WITH GRANT OPTION

Types of privileges:
• SELECT • INSERT / DELETE / UPDATE [(Attributes)] 
• REFERENCES [(Attributes)]: define foreign keys in other tables that refer to Attributes 
• WITH GRANT OPTION: privileges can be transferred to other users.


## Create Indexes
They are used to speed up data access.
It is not a standard SQL command and therefore there are differences in the various systems 

CREATE INDEX NameIdx ON Table(Attributes) 

CREATE INDEX NameIdx ON Table
	WITH STRUCTURE = BTREE, KEY = (Attributes)
	
DROP INDEX NameIdx


## Summary

Summary
1. DDL allows the definition of tables, views, and indexes.
	1. Tables can be modified by adding or removing Attributes and constraints.
	2. Views can be queried like any other table, but in general they do not allow data changes.
	3. Indexes are used to speed up data access (not sql command)
2. GRANT/REVOKE commands and VIEWS offer extensive possibilities for controlling data usage.



