## Outline
1. functional dependencies
	1. defining a fd
	2. satisfying a fd (for a specific instance)
	3. expressing a fd (in english)
	4. manipulating fd (with the rule)
	5. examples of fd
2. keys and other definitions
	1. schema R
	2. complete fd
	3. superkey (it is a set of A)
	4. key
3. implications vs deductions
	1. implication definition
	2. Armstrong's axioms
	3. deduction (or inference or derivation) using axioms
	4. examples
	5. correctness and completedness of axioms
4. closures
	1. closure of FD
	2. closure of X (set of attributes A)
	3. fundamental theorem
	4. algo for computing closures of X (slow closure)
	5. finding a key
	6. prime attributes
5. equivalence p.17
	1. equivalence of sets of FD
	2. redundant and extraneous attributes
	3. canonical covers
6. decomposition p.22
	1. lossless join decomposition definition
	2. binary decomposition theorem
	3. projection of FD
	4. preservation of FD
	5. bcnf
	6. analysis algo
	7. 3nf
	8. synthesis algo

## Handwritten
[[DB-normalization.pdf]]

## Type of exercises
*ex1*
Consider the relational scheme R(A,B,C,D,E) 
with the following FDs: CD->A, CA->B, CD-> E, BA->C 
a) Find one key for R 
b) Knowing that the prime attributes are {A,B,C,D}, tell if the scheme is in 3NF or in BCNF. 
c) Apply the analysis algorithm to the scheme and tell whether the decomposition preserves the dependencies. 
d) Apply the synthesis algorithm to the scheme.

*ex_corrected_20240514*
Consider the following relational scheme (the set of functional dependencies constitutes a canonical cover): R< ABCDE, { AB->C, AC->B, AB->D, D->A, E->B } > 
1. Find at least one key 
2. Knowing that the set of prime attributes is { A,D, E }, check which normal forms are respected by the schema 
3. Apply the synthesis algorithm 
4. Apply the analysis algorithm and tell if the dependencies have been preserved

## Handwritten notes






----
# (some notes)

A couple of weeks about normalization.
Then a couple of weeks about internals.

This is mostly about math.
And theorems are important (no proof).

> Just the correct definition

Why study normalization? To avoid redundancy that ruins the quality of the data.

The goal is to create a good decomposition starting from functional dependencies using an algorithm

## 1. Functional Dependencies
We want an algorithm to design a good schema from an horrible schema.
What does it mean for a schema to be good?
How can we see if they are equivalents?
We use *functional dependencies*.
It distinguish valid instances from invalid instances.
It means that it is not possible to have two lines that coincide on x and not on y.


Given a scheme R(T) and X, Y $\subseteq$ T, a functional dependency ( FD ) is a constraint on the instances of R.
X functionally determines Y, written X→Y, iff: 
- $\forall$r valid instance of R
- $\forall t1, t2 \in r$
- $\text{ if }  t1[X] = t2[X] \implies t1[Y] = t2[Y]$


## Clause Manipulation
$$True\wedge A \wedge B\implies False \vee C \vee D$$
And you can move variables from right to left and viceversa by negating it.

This allows to manipulate sentences in order to obtain functional dependencies.

## Logical Implication
Simple definition
...

It can be computed using the set of 3 inference rules. Called Armstrong 


## Deduction
What is the difference?




---

# Normalization from book

## 1. Functional Dependencies
*definition of FUNCTIONAL DEPENDENCY*
Given a relation schema R(T ) and X, Y ⊆ T , a functional dependency (FD) is a constraint on R of the form X → Y, i.e. X functionally determines Y or Y is determined by X, if for any legal instance r of R a value of X uniquely determines a value of Y 

`∀t1, t2 ∈ r such that t1[X] = t2[X] implies t1[Y] = t2[Y]` (3.1) 

We say that an instance r of R satisﬁes the FD X → Y if condition (3.1) holds, and that an instance r of R satisﬁes a set F of FD if, for each X → Y ∈ F, condition (3.1) holds.
Condition (3.1) formally expresses the following constraint: in any legal instance r of R, if two tuples have the same X value, then they will also have the same Y value.

We will use the convention that R〈T , F〉 denotes a schema with a set T of attributes and a set F of functional dependencies over T .

*definition of Logical Implication*
Given a set F of FDs on a schema R, we say that F |= X → Y, i.e. F logically implies X → Y, if every instance r of R that satisﬁes F also satisﬁes X → Y. 

Let us consider a legal instance r of R〈T , F〉, with F = {X → Y, X → Z}, X, Y, Z ⊆ T , and W ⊆ X. Many other functional dependencies are satisﬁed by r including, for example, X → W and X → YZ. In fact, in the ﬁrst case, if two tuples have the same value on X, they will certainly have the same value on W which is a subset of X (trivial FD); in the second case if t1[X] = t2[X], since t1, t2 satisfy the FDs in F, it is also the case that t1[Y] = t2[Y] and t1[Z] = t2[Z], and consequently t1[YZ] = t2[YZ]. Thus, given a set F of FDs, other FDs will generally be ‘implied’ by this set.
From this deﬁnition, we say that {X → Y, X → Z} |= X → YZ and W ⊆ X {} |= X → W

An interesting question is whether there is a way of computing all the possible FDs logically implied by a set F, using a set of inference rules with the property of being sound and complete so that we can derive all the FDs implied by F, and only those.

## 2. Inference Rules
A set of inference rule to derive new FDs from a given set F are the Armstrong’s axioms3: 

F1 (reﬂexivity) If Y ⊆ X, then X → Y 
F2 (augmentation) If X → Y, Z ⊆ T , then XZ → YZ 
F3 (transitivity) If X → Y, Y → Z, then X → Z  

Deﬁnition 3.6 
F |- X → Y iff X → Y can be inferred from F using Armstrong’s axioms as inference rules. 

Using these rules, the following rules can also be proved correct 
{X → Y, X → Z} |- X → YZ (union rule) 
Z ⊆ Y {X → Y} |- X → Z(decomposition rule) 
{} |- X → X 
Z ⊆ Y{X → Y} |- XZ → Y 
W ⊆ Z, V ⊆ Y {X → Y} |- XZ → VW

So far, we have discussed derived dependencies in two ways: we have talked about logically implied dependencies (|=) and about dependencies which are inferred using Armstrong’s axioms as deduction rules (|-). In fact, these two ways of deﬁning derived dependencies are the same: if a functional dependency f can be inferred from a set F using Armstrong’s axioms, then f is logically implied by F (soundness), and, vice versa, if f is logically implied by F, then f can also be inferred using Armstrong’s axioms (completeness). 

Theorem 3.1 
Armstrong’s axioms are sound and complete. 

A consequence of this theorem is that we can substitute |= with |- and vice versa in all the previous results.








---

## Exercises
[[DB_ex_24_04]]