*14/11*
I want to understand the structure of the dataset.
In particular, I want to understand
1. each feature, so that I can fill missing values
2. how the 3 files are related to each other, so that I can do a join and work with a unique operational table, that will be later divided into dimensional tables for the analysis
3. looking at the BQ, if I can have an idea of the solution and if it possible to anwer
4. think of additional data to be integrated
	1. can I use flows in the lds dataset? are they useful?
	2. what if I use a tesselletion and set maybe the avg salary of the neighborhood.
	3. POIs from OSM. How do they can be useful for insurance purposes?

I found the following resources online:
1. [crashes description](https://data.cityofchicago.org/Transportation/Traffic-Crashes-Crashes/85ca-t3if/about_data)
Crash data shows information about each traffic crash on city streets within the City of Chicago limits and under the jurisdiction of Chicago Police Department (CPD). Data are shown as is from the electronic crash reporting system (E-Crash) at CPD, excluding any personally identifiable information. Records are added to the data portal when a crash report is finalized or when amendments are made to an existing report in E-Crash. Data from E-Crash are available for some police districts in 2015, but citywide data are not available until September 2017. About half of all crash reports, mostly minor crashes, are self-reported at the police district by the driver(s) involved and the other half are recorded at the scene by the police officer responding to the crash. Many of the crash parameters, including street condition data, weather condition, and posted speed limits, are recorded by the reporting officer based on best available information at the time, but many of these may disagree with posted information or other assessments on road conditions. If any new or updated information on a crash is received, the reporting officer may amend the crash report at a later time. A traffic crash within the city limits for which CPD is not the responding police agency, typically crashes on interstate highways, freeway ramps, and on local roads along the City boundary, are excluded from this dataset.

2. [people description]()
This data contains information about people involved in a crash and if any injuries were sustained. This dataset should be used in combination with the traffic Crash and Vehicle dataset. Each record corresponds to an occupant in a vehicle listed in the Crash dataset. Some people involved in a crash may not have been an occupant in a motor vehicle, but may have been a pedestrian, bicyclist, or using another non-motor vehicle mode of transportation. Injuries reported are reported by the responding police officer. Fatalities that occur after the initial reports are typically updated in these records up to 30 days after the date of the crash. Person data can be linked with the Crash and Vehicle dataset using the “CRASH_RECORD_ID” field. A vehicle can have multiple occupants and hence have a one to many relationship between Vehicle and Person dataset. However, a pedestrian is a “unit” by itself and have a one to one relationship between the Vehicle and Person table.

3. [vehicles description](https://data.cityofchicago.org/Transportation/Traffic-Crashes-Vehicles/68nd-jvt3/about_data)
This dataset contains information about vehicles (or units as they are identified in crash reports) involved in a traffic crash. This dataset should be used in conjunction with the traffic Crash and People dataset available in the portal. “Vehicle” information includes motor vehicle and non-motor vehicle modes of transportation, such as bicycles and pedestrians. Each mode of transportation involved in a crash is a “unit” and get one entry here. Each vehicle, each pedestrian, each motorcyclist, and each bicyclist is considered an independent unit that can have a trajectory separate from the other units. However, people inside a vehicle including the driver do not have a trajectory separate from the vehicle in which they are travelling and hence only the vehicle they are travelling in get any entry here. This type of identification of “units” is needed to determine how each movement affected the crash. Data for occupants who do not make up an independent unit, typically drivers and passengers, are available in the People table. Many of the fields are coded to denote the type and location of damage on the vehicle. Vehicle information can be linked back to Crash data using the “CRASH_RECORD_ID” field. Since this dataset is a combination of vehicles, pedestrians, and pedal cyclists not all columns are applicable to each record. Look at the Unit Type field to determine what additional data may be available for that record.




